I'm joined by Chris Witty Chief Medical officer and so Patrick balance the Chief Scientific advisor. Can I start with an update on the Prime Minister He still in intensive care, but he continues to make positive step forwards and he's in good spirits and I can also report from the government's ongoing monitoring and testing program that as of today, 240 - 3420 - one people have 60 - 5070 - seven, have tested positive and the number of people admitted to hospital with Corona virus symptoms now stands at 16780 - four and those who contracted the virus 7970 - eight, have sadly died and our thoughts and our The whole country has been practicing a stringent form of social distancing the three weeks now precisely because we do everything we can to minimize the bleak numbers that I just read out and for that, I want to say a massive thank you to everyone who's going the extra mile during this very challenging period. Thank you to all of those who are looking after us in our time of need the NHS workers on the front line who have treated the sick saved lives and tendon for those. Who sadly could not be saved for the doctors and nurses who have died of Korean virus while caring for others, We will never forget their sacrifice. We will never forget their devotion to helping others. I also want to say a big thank you to the care is the charity workers all those looking after or even just keeping an eye on those in their local neighborhood. You are the lifeline to so many people in our communities. Thank you to the workers who keep the country running the supermarket workers the delivery drivers the technicians the cleaners, the public servants who just kept going determined to keep providing the daily services that we all rely on. I think you've certainly made. I think long and hard about who the key workers are in our lives. Thank you to the volunteers who have stepped up across the country whose big hearted sense of responsibility defines British community spirit at its very best. The massive Thank you to every single person who stayed home to stop this terrible virus from spreading you've helped to protect the NHS and you've helped to save lives. Now, as we look on to the I look forward to the long Bank holiday Easter weekend, I know some people are going to start wondering is it time to ease up on the rules? So I have to say thank you for your sacrifice, but also we're not done yet we must keep going. Let me just explain a little bit about why that's so important. Today I shared a Cobra meeting with senior ministers officials and representatives representatives from Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland, as well as the mayor of London so that we could take stock and assess where we are right across the United Kingdom and at this stage, the government is continuing to gather all of the relevant data to obtain the fullest picture possible of the effects of the social distancing measures that we put in place now, while the early signs should suggest that they are having the impact that we need to see it's too early to say that conclusively say. Meet next week to discuss the latest evidence and will keep the measures we put in place under review as we said on many occasions now will be guided by the science at all times, so we don't expect to be able to say more on this until the end of next week and let me just be again very clear about this. The measures will have to stay in place until we got the evidence that clearly shows we move beyond the peak. I knew these restrictions take that dog take their toll day in day out on people's live events on people's quality of life on people's mental health, and I appreciate that it's often the little things that hurt the most with the Easter Bank holiday. coming up. I normally spend it with my two boys seven and five years old with their grandparents doing an Easter egg hunt and I know there's going to be lots of people who would normally be planning a family get together or just getting out in the sunshine with friends and loved ones. Unfortunately, right now, we just can't do those sorts of things and I'm really sorry about that, but just take a moment to think of the progress that we've already made following the guidance staying at home, denying the virus what it needs to spread more easily and to kill more people. It's been almost three weeks and we're starting to see the impact of the sacrifices we will made, but the deaths are still rising and we haven't yet reached the peak of the virus still too early to lift the measures that we put in place. We must stick to the plan and we must continue to be guided by the science a top priority. Our immediate priority remains to slow the spread of the virus and to save as many lives as possible. That's why we have to continue to ask you to keep complying with the guidance and as we've said consistently from the outset, it's vital. we take the right decisions at the right time and the mind and the most important thing right now is that people continue to follow the government's guidance. We got the evidence that the virus is firmly under control, so that means please do stay at home to protect our NHS and to save lives after all the efforts that everyone's made after all the sacrifices so many people have made, it's not ruin it now. It's not undo the gains we've made let's not waste the sacrifices so many people have made we must not give the Corona virus a second chance to kill more people and to hurt our country. It's tough guy, but this is a team effort and will only defeat this virus for good if we all stay the course so please stay home this Bank holiday weekend that everyone safe and I will turn to Satan to give us an update on the very latest data. so Patrick you thank you very much as the first Secretary, said the measures that everybody has taken the difficult things that we've all had to do are making a difference and they're making a big difference. We know that. Social distancing is working and we know that people are doing what they're supposed to do and we need to keep doing that and the reason we need to keep doing that is because it stops the transmission of the virus in the community and we know that that is already happening next live please. As a result of stopping the transmission in the community, we stop new cases appearing and this slide the numbers go up and down a bit, but what you can see is it's not taking off in that sharp uptake. It's not gone Sky high and if anything that might even be some flattening. that is because what we're all doing with social distancing if we had not done that those cases would now be very much fire if those cases were higher next slide, please. This graph wouldn't look like this, we would find many many more people in hospital, we would find the health system potentially overrun and what you can see on this graph is the increase in hospital admissions people in hospital beds with Covert and it has gone up across the country, but it's not gone up in that steep way and again if anything we're beginning to see the first signs of this leveling off too early. Be sure too early to know that this is on the way down, but it's not got that fast up swing that it would have had had your will not been doing what we are doing with these difficult measures of social distancing and if the hospital beds were full of next slide, please then importantly some with intensive care and it's been even fuller and people are working heroically in intensive care units to look after the very sick patients were there but again. Is not the shot up stroke a big increases in numbers. it's a steady increase in numbers, which might just might be beginning to flatten off, but it's certainly not accelerating. That means that the NHS can cope. It's got the right numbers of beds with the new expansion in order to be able to cope with it. So if we were not doing what we do and if we don't continue to do what we're doing in terms of the social distancing, we put all this at risk we jeopardize. The thing that's allowed us to get to this position and if I can have the last line, please unfortunately, sadly there are deaths from this disease and those continue to rise and you can see here the increase in rise in the UK and in other countries, this will not change for a few weeks because the deaths from after the other illnesses the early illness intensive care and then in some patients, unfortunately, die and that will continue. Increase for a few weeks, we need to see this begin to go down as well. It should follow the others so the message is clear. Which is the social distancing that we're all doing is breaking transmission. It's stopping the hospital admissions beginning to see that flattening of still unbelievably busy, but beginning to see that platinum, it's preventing more people going into intensive care and it will prevent deaths. It's incredibly important. We continue to do what you're doing. Thank you Patrick. We take some questions from the media I think from the. you thank you. We've heard some harrowing stories of people dying alone because family can't be with them for understandable reasons to do with the forest risk. What do you say to the British public about how things will develop from here? well at the first thing I would say is thank you for all. you're doing not just the key workers as essential as they are and we've approved them. For the incredible work they've done but also to every individual who's followed the advice and the guidance, but we made progress. Patrick is set that out. I think very clearly but we don't know conclusively that would be on the point at which we could start considering whether the major will be relaxed. so we must keep it up and I think the key thing is for people to understand how much of what they've already done has helped contribute to avoiding an even worse situation in terms of the split. The virus and the number of deaths and how important it is that we don't slow up or take our pressure off at this critical moment before we've come through the peak. so we recognize the sacrifices so many people have made. it's a team effort and as a country we need to be United in this mission. We've got to keep it up. Did you want to come back with anything further? maybe maybe to Patrick balance or a little bit more on the death projections that you that you have got. I know it's difficult but how long and how fast you. You expect the deaths to carry on rising in general, I'd expect the deaths to continue to keep going up for about two weeks after the intensive care picture improves and so we're not there yet in terms of knowing exactly when that will be, but that's the sort of time frame to expect from Scott. Suspect Brittain needs a little bit of hope going into this Easter weekend to Dominic Rob will the government set out in public the principles that will guide you when you do finally come to lifting this lockdown, Anglin, the German Chancellor said today that the government would do that next week. Can you commit to do something similar and to Chris Witty and two pretty excuse? You were very concerned about the speed that the current virus was whipping through communities. Can you say how fast it is now going? Being transmitted, it has that transmission rate now come down or is it still going through Brittain as fast as it works. Thanks and we'll look at the positive is that I think as we hopefully set out clearly, we can show people that all the sacrifices that they be made and all the forbearance that they've showed has made a real difference. It is safe lives. It has helped protect the NHS and we're also not on the same point along the peak as the Germans, so I'm not sure that the direct analysis works, but what we will do. Is continue to be followed by the evidence and the science and as we've always said, as I said earlier will take the right decisions at the right moment in time. that's all I'm saying directly the question that you asked about the speed at the time when I was first talking about this the doubling time have fast, we were doubling in terms of numbers, particularly in intensive care, was around about three days very debate. This has got steadily longer in time over the last two weeks. Thanks to what people have done and as a Patrick showed in the data, this is really now becoming not quite flat, but it is doubling time is now six or more days in almost everywhere in the country and extending in time. That is that would that is only happened because of what everybody has done what we've all done in terms of staying at home and only going out to work exercise and critical shopping and medical care if I can just add one thing in terms of the principles and this is not principles accepting the narrow sense of health. I think it's important to remember. But the the direct effects of people dying from Corona virus and this has been affected by people helping to pull the curve down. but there are also indirect effects, which have to be taken into account when we're thinking about the health effects of the long term, Those include the indirect effects worthy NHS to be overwhelmed and because of people's actions, the there's still room in intensive care still room in the emergency services across the country. Indiana. Of other health issues, but we also have to remember the effects on things that have to be delayed to free up NHS space and we have to think about the effects of the long-term health effects of some of the economic measures and these are all health things and there are other economic and other things that need to be taken into account by ministers, but for me as a doctor and think about health things, all of these need to be taken into account and working at how is the best way to go to the next stage in this epidemic, if I could also come in. Chris spoke about the doubling time in intensive care, which is got longer if you look in the community at the moment, you would expect that to be no doubling time. This is not doubling in the community. you would expect this now to be shrinking, but all the reasons I've said in the evidence suggests that that is what's happening in terms of the transmission in community. so that's all points in the right direction of the doubling time in ICU is a reflection of what's happening earlier in the efforts that have been. In terms of social distance, so did you want to follow up and just in terms of publishing the principles that we will rely on perhaps not next week because we are as insane different place to Germany, but will the British government at some point explain to the British people are given a document on the trade offs and the evidence about how they're gonna go about lifting the longer we will look we'll make the right decisions that the right moments and will be guided by the sign. That's really what's at this point, but just remember, I think that the focus and we don't see any distraction from that as we look forward to the long Bank holiday weekend is just picking up on the evidence that Patrick and Chris has set out is not to take her off the ball not to undo all the good work not to undo the sacrifices so many people have made by becoming more lax or failing to follow the guidance at just the moment where we need to make sure we double down follow the guidance. Through this page, I think that's the most important thing right now. Hannah Miller. Thank you, Foreign Secretary two questions for you today. Greater Manchester Police revealed that last weekend they received reports of more than a thousand gatherings. How can they possibly be expected to police map when around a fifth of best staff are not in work and secondly, I want to talk to you about furling. we spent following sorry we've spoken to a blind warehouse worker in Rochdale called Joe He's worried about being able to socially distance and he's being told to go in or to take unpaid leave. the government said it wants employers to take socially responsible decisions that sound socially. Responsible to you the details of the case, but it sounds like a very vulnerable individual. We provide the support to employees. We know where they are under pressure and we want all businesses to do the right thing. We do know bit and I think it's important result able together and particularly for the most vulnerable in our communities. so I want people to think employees to think long and hard if they have people like that and who they're employing and who are within their care and the broader sense. I'm on the issue. I think it was great to manage the police and the police doing a great. And it's a very difficult line for them to walk and but I think they're doing a terrific job and above all as we go into this long holiday weekend, I think people should think very own heart, not just about the guidance and the importance of keeping up but about what happens to those on the NHS front line who are doing a heroic job if people in large numbers don't comply with those rules and I would urge everyone just take a moment before they do anything. However, woman is however great the temptations just to think about the sacrifices Those on the front line, particularly in our NHS are making. Do you want to come back again? Yeah, It's just on the fellow in and guidance around people with disabilities. Do you accept that the guidance around social distancing for people with disabilities, perhaps needs to be looked at in a bit more detail, but we can certainly take another look at it but it it causes the way It's applied. It's really important with the a flexibility and again as I said a sense of the fact that rule in this together we pull through this together so we can always look at the guidance. We want to make sure it's as clear as possible, but it's the way it's implemented as well, which is really important. Then continue from. Melvin Thank you for in Secretary. you talked about the sacrifices that NHS workers are making, and we're hearing more stories about today. People losing their lives. in some cases. they're telling us because they haven't got the right equipment now, so thank them for that work. Thousands of people around the country. tonight will take part in the cap throughout clap for our click carrots but I wanted if today you could go further and commit to when this crisis is over, giving them a real reward. Financial thank you for the sacrifices in the air that they're making on behalf of all. If I may can, I ask the chief scientific adviser and Matt Hancock Health Secretary mentioned last week that a surveillance study was being carried out with an antibody test. It's been developed by public health England. Could you tell us what the early results of that show in terms of how many people in Britain have had the virus and how many would you expect to have had it in the 12 to 18 months or so? Until a vaccine is developed thanks, but I think they're really good points. I think the care is and all those in the front line as I pay tribute to. in my early remarks, I've done an amazing job. We're obviously doing everything we can to provide the equipment the PPE that they need. We're rolling that out at pace with you know, I recognize that they've been challenges with the distribution. We've got a help line but most importantly we've we were really rolling that out in place. We've got the military involved and where that's appropriate. Taking part in the platform this evening and you're you're right. There will be a moment where we look at how we formally recognize all of those in the front line have done so much to put us through this very difficult period for our country Only test antibody test. The first thing to say, is these tests are difficult to get right so so they're across the world. People are trying to get really specific and sensitive tests on this and that's a lot of collaboration across the world to do that the scientist and public health England have worked on this and yes, there is a surveillance study underway. I don't know the results yet. This will continue until we've got the right results and they're able to communicate them. and of course they will communicate them like all good scientific practice as soon as they're ready and they know what what they show and they can validate these are reliable results. so that's what's going on at the moment and in terms of you know how many people would you expect to get this before a vaccine or treatment comes along? I think the process is that we got in place a clear to suppress the number of the idea is to try and keep that number as low as. Did you want to come back if I may just there will be a time to reward NHS work cuz I wondered if you just might spec down a person and what you want for you think that should take, but I do think it's important while they're doing this great job and we're all trying to focus on getting us through the peak that we keep our our focus our attention on that and and and I want to give it proper thought with all of the other people in government, but what I would say is. I think we all recognize the enormous sacrifice they've made how much it's done to help pull us through even to this level. how much it's done to avoid some of the worst scenarios we could have otherwise face and I'm sure there'll be the you know appropriate level of recognition at the right moment once we threw the the worst of it all right from the times. thank you. I'm a question first to professor with you. If I may, we know that the daily death figures that you're reporting come from the NHS but we're expecting. The biggest in the office of National Statistics, which will be wider than that do you expect that when you take into account care, homes and other settings that we'll see a significant rise in the in the total death rate and just to follow up on on point with Patrick John Newton said last week on this antibody study that's been carried out put them down, but they were days away from having living room. you say that you haven't seen results, but would you anticipate that those? Results will be made available to the Committee that will advise ministers on the next stage in the lockdown. I'm on the NHS figures versus the NHS figures so they they measure different things the reason the NHS figures are very useful for us is we can get them very fast and they are collected in the same way the whole time and they're very comfortable actually to international figures that which tend to be collected in the same way. So what that allows us to do that is what Patrick was doing at the beginning, which is to see in relatively near time at the trends overtime cuz it's a steady this is a very stable way of collecting the data OS data. Much and those NHS figures are all people who are proven to have creative on testing, so they're definitely cases in hospitals. The OS stickers are much wider than that. I would therefore expect that it's not just that they go further outside hospital. They also include people who have sadly died where the doctor thinks the current of ours may be involved even if there is no test involved in that decision and I would expect those numbers to be higher but. It takes longer for the days to come in it. That's always going to be lagging behind behind between those two amounts, which makes the OSC data extremely useful for looking at the wider picture that the NHS data is more useful for us to make decisions day-to-day and to make decisions for example about what we need to change in terms of our current interventions and the answer is yes, Of course, we would expect to see those results in Sage and we'll see them when they are ready and the studies have been completed. And they've been properly analyzed that we we spend a little time looking at this from across the world as well had calls with colleagues from many countries earlier this week on this very topic had a cool last night with somebody from Stanford University doing working in this area. This is something we look at right the way across the world all the time, and of course, the PHD results will come to sage when they're ready. You want to come back to that all the strawberries possible help you manage to have any contact with the Prime Minister since he took over his responsibility as a tool. Not yeah, I think it's a. Particularly while he's in intensive care, so let's focus on recovery, we in the government have got this covered and I chaired the Cobra meeting that I just come from where the shooting all the different strands of our strategy to defeat the virus and I'm confident we'll get there. George Parker from the FT. For the foreign Secretary about the Bank of England's decision, they effectively extended overdraft facility to the government, but told this is a temporary measure. But nevertheless, it's very unusual. Can you explain exactly why the government needs this facility and as it possibly because cost of your economic interventions to address the crisis, costing more than you expected to cure the job retention scheme and separate question for Professor Whitney. we heard today from the US scientific equipment maker Thermopylae. They have a an agreement with the government supply 100000 swab tests a day at least not just check that is correct. and if so, what are we waiting for So George on the Bank of England decision? Obviously, we've got Independent Bank of England and they make those decisions all honestly as you said, it's a temporary measure, but the broader picture is from the fiscal measures that the chances taken through to the measure stated by the Bank of England. We want to make sure that we're in the best position. Not just to see us through this crisis from a health point of view is important as that is, but also from an economic or economic point of view and we're making sure that we use all the leaders across government to to achieve them. I'm on the testing. We're ramping up every day on the testing, but I think it's important to to differentiate between tests available and ready to run and the whole system running in terms of in the lab and actually having the whole system running. so you're very confident that someone who needs a test can order the right test and we'll get the right result back and the whole process is. Every single day this month, I expect to see an increase in the number of test that I go out in the number of results to come back, including thermopylae, but not any beneficial. There are quite a few other groups who were involved in this. I want to follow up there. George Yeah, just a very quick one to prosperity. I mean listen. this really reflect the fact that the problem lies in the streets, not through any example, shortage of chemicals, which is something that I gave those that last week and mister Rob pretty quickly something going back to your earlier opening remarks, you said that they will have. Stay in place until we have clear evidence that clearly shows we've moved beyond the peak should be assuming that the restrictions will start to be used when I think the whole point is not to make assumptions but to be guided by the evidence when we've got it when. In terms of kit, I mean both there was a period when both swabs and reagents were in short supply. That's beginning to sort itself out. That doesn't stop that, but you know a testing process is a long chain of which actually doing the test is in the Middle of it, but there are large part side the side but the you're absolutely right that that was about a barrier is much less of a barrier that has not gone away completely, but it's a lot better than it was. Thanks George. You go you go guy from the from the eye. thank you secretary authority in the prime minister's absence where where you are sharing ah the committees and the cover that you would normally do all you authorize to make big decisions for example on a lifting the lock down ah decision that's gonna have to come next week if the prime minister is still on available can make that decision and say that he did that he would do And so Patrick can I just as you pointed out the master surveillance testing results are not are not yet available. Do you have any estimate or tool for how many people in the UK have probably been infected with Corona virus or are we just still flying blind on that point so, thanks very much you go. We've got all the authority. I need to make the relevant decisions whether it's through sharing Cabinet updates. I did that in the week Cobra or indeed the meetings in the morning meetings of senior ministers. We've got a great team. It's a team effort and obviously it's not exactly the same as when the Prime Minister was here. That's very clear but as he's first Secretary deputized to discharge his responsibilities with all the authority, we need I think in in terms of the test, one of the reasons it's so important to get that test out is to try and work out the proportion of people who may have had the disease a symptomatically I think across the world. Looking less likely that it's a very high number, so it's not likely that it's 90 percent of people have had it symptomatically much more likely it's lower than 50 It could be around 30, but we don't know for sure and in terms of the number of people who've had it in each country. That's why the antibody test is so important. There are beginning to be some stories of people getting answers to that question. again, I wouldn't expect that to be a high percentage and most of the figures that come out so far are low single digit percentages, but we need to see there. Examples of slightly higher percentages than that, but these are early day trim. We need to make sure that we've got the right information. would you like a supplementary there? You go? Yes, I can I just clarify Patrick appreciate the picture is still unclear, but you would expect it to be three simple well under 10 percent. Probably people in the UK have been been infected by comparison to the situation and overcoming exactly is that terrible. I can't tell you what the answer is going to be. We need to do the experiment. find out the answer, but from what I've seen from other places, it's mainly single digit number. And it could be a bit higher in some places. Andrew McCaskill from writers How many thanks I've got a quick questions for the advisers of US factory and fight. Did you want Committee members writers and not begin reviewing modeling books exist the full lock down across the country until mid March and for Chris Witty Brittain Corona virus test on January tenth, Why did it take more than two months? Contaminated labs to Austin to break area tests Thank you and maybe I'll tell you what happened and and that's the easiest way to answer the question, which is we started working on this in January? we had our first full stage meeting in January had a pre saved before the end of before the 20 fourth of January. We have a meeting and in February remodeled all of the interventions that you've now seen and those interventions were modeled looked at in sage including scenario. Years of full lockdown to push the peak out to autumn, they were done throughout February. That's why in early March, it was possible for the Department of Health and Social Care to publish an action plan, which included all the measures and reported that all of these might be necessary at some point and they needed to be put in the right combination and it's an orders to get the maximum benefit. So it's not correct that we didn't model it til March We move throughout February, and that, of course is what they're to the action plan. Yeah. I mean you gotta remember this is completely new virus initially from the time that actually the Chinese scientists put the Gina type on the Web, which is a fantastic first step. We moved incredibly quickly to get a first test. there was quite a rapid ramp up, but initially had to start off to be sure the test worked to make a point which I made before getting a test. That's inaccurate is really unhelpful, so we have to be confident about that and then it was rolled out in stages and it continues to be rolled out in stages and will continue all the way through this month. Would you like a? A question on that point, we were told by this is Patrick John told us that need a Ferguson any modeling the lockdown until March wondering why there's that discrepancy there well, I'm not gonna. I didn't know exactly what John said. Do what he didn't say to you. I know what happened and I just told you what happened in the modeling came in from a variety of sources. Thanks Angie. Thank you very much.
PagesBusinessesMedia/news companyITV NewsV
